Welcome to the June 2021 program
of JW Broadcasting®!
The 149th class of Gilead
graduated on January 16, 2021.
The students were able
to take full advantage of the school
despite the pandemic
and the extra efforts to remain safe.
How will they use their training
in this time of the end?
How did they personally benefit
from the school?
Let’s find out in Part 1
of this historic graduation program.
This has indeed been a unique class of Gilead
at a most unique time in world events.
The Bethel family is fully aware
of what transpired.
But since this program
will be broadcast to our global brotherhood,
let me remind all of you of what transpired.
You are well aware
of the unique time in world events
—a global pandemic!
What makes this class so unique?
A normal class of Gilead
consists of some 50 students.
The 149th class is made up of just 25.
Your class is abnormal.
But why?
You know why.
But let me share your experience
with the worldwide brotherhood.
Those who had been invited
to attend this class of Gilead
had begun to arrive at the Watchtower
Educational Center at Patterson, New York.
The 25 students in this class
actually arrived in mid-March of 2020.
And as we all know,
it was at that time that the coronavirus
was declared to be a global pandemic.
Most travel was shut down.
The rest of their classmates could not come.
Because of government restrictions
on educational facilities,
the 149th class had to be postponed.
You students were stuck at Patterson,
New York, with no classes in session.
Commendably, many of you
were able to work remotely
for your home branch office in the interim.
Finally, here in New York,
government agencies
allowed for educational facilities
to again conduct classes
if physical distancing could be maintained.
With just 25 of you,
that was possible in the Gilead lecture hall.
So we have only 25 “abnormal” students
who will graduate today.
To clarify,
it is the number of students
that makes this class “abnormal.”
But I am told by your instructors
that, individually,
you are very “normal.”
In fact, they are very impressed
with your spirituality
and your Christian personalities.
You have excelled in your studies
and classroom participation.
It’s a delight to be with you
on this very special day.
What else, though, makes this
an “abnormal” Gilead graduation?
You were not able to invite
family members and close friends
to be here in person with you
for this exciting event.
However, the Teaching Committee
made arrangements for you
to tie in a number of these ones
for a streamed recording of the program.
And the good news is
that the entire program
is being recorded and will be posted
as a future JW Broadcasting monthly program
in all of the approved languages.
We have a few statistics
to share about the 149th class.
Of the 25 students, 8 are married couples;
7 are single brothers,
and there are 2 single sisters in the class.
I guess they’re still single.
All were serving at a Bethel branch facility
or at a remote translation office
before attending school.
The students are from 14 different countries
and speak 29 different languages.
Their average age is 41.
That’s a good age.
Forty-four years ago, I was 41.
Their average years
in full-time service is 20.
In the Bible, Gilead referred
to a territory in Israel.
And that name, “Gilead,”
was derived from a Hebrew word
that meant “witness heap.”
When the school
was first inaugurated in 1943,
“Gilead” was an appropriate name.
One of the instructors
described the purpose of the school,
saying that it was
“to instill in the students
a more intense desire
to share in the evangelizing work.”
And for decades,
thousands of missionaries were sent out
to open up new territories around the world.
A “heap of witness” was given
during that period of time.
However, in 2011,
the Governing Body
adjusted the specific purpose of Gilead.
Instead of focusing on opening up
new territories for preaching,
the purpose of the curriculum changed.
As we mentioned previously,
this entire class was already serving
at a Bethel facility
or a remote translation office.
The goal of Gilead now
is to bolster such ones so as to strengthen
and stabilize God’s people
in the respective territories
to which they will be assigned.
Then, what about the all-important
evangelizing work?
Who is assisting
with the “heap of witness” worldwide?
That’s now the focus
of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
Each Branch Committee
selects qualified pioneers
who are willing to be transferred
to another part of the country
that needs help with the preaching work.
By using the large pool
of zealous local pioneers,
the “heap of witness” is still being given
where the need is greater.
These local ones
are already adapted to the culture,
climate, and living conditions
in their countries
and, often times,
they already know the language
where there is the greatest need.
However, the 25 of you
in this class of Gilead
are expected to strengthen
and stabilize God’s people
where you are assigned.
Well, what does that entail?
For you brothers,
in time, it may mean that you
will be given more responsibility.
But your training has given you another way
to stabilize fellow believers
in your assignment.
And this applies to all 25 of you,
whether brothers or sisters.
You have been elevated while here at Gilead.
In fact, in the territory of Gilead,
in the Bible,
the elevation changes dramatically.
In the Jordan Valley,
Gilead was 690 feet,
or 210 meters below sea level.
But traveling east
to the domelike mountainous region of Gilead,
the elevation rises
to over 3,300 feet,
or 1,000 meters.
You students came to Gilead below sea level.
But with daily Bible study and lectures,
you have been elevated.
Throughout the past five months,
your faith has grown.
Your spirituality has been enhanced.
Your Christian personality has been refined.
You have been elevated.
You will be going out to your assignment,
not so much for a “heap of witness,”
but as a “heap of example.”
In this way,
you will strengthen and stabilize
those you work with at the branch
and those you associate
with in your congregations.
Find Deuteronomy 8:17, 18.
Never forget that your power and strength,
your spiritual wealth,
does not originate with you.
It is Jehovah who has made
this transformation in you.
Read with me, Deuteronomy 8:17, 18:
“If you should say in your heart,
“‘My own power
“‘and the strength of my own hand
“have produced this wealth for me,’
“remember that it is Jehovah your God
“who gives power to you to make wealth,
“in order to carry out his covenant
“that he swore to your forefathers,
as it is today.”
Today, you will graduate
from the 149th class of Gilead.
But you will strengthen
and stabilize those in your assignment
if you “remember
“that it is Jehovah your God
who gives power to you.”
For decades, we have been reminded
to read God’s Word daily.
It was even painted
on the side of the factory building
in Brooklyn for decades.
Brother David Splane is going
to take that a step further
with his theme
“Enjoy Your Bible Reading.”
The Bible is a wonderful book.
It’s a book
that we should just enjoy reading.
So for this talk, I thought I’d give
a couple of suggestions
for adding to our reading pleasure.
Here’s the first:
Don’t pass quickly over the details.
Stop and investigate,
and at times you’ll be very glad you did.
Now, let’s take an example.
You’re reading in the book of 1 Chronicles.
Now, there are
a lot of names in 1 Chronicles,
and you come across the name Heman.
If you are just interested
in covering material,
you’d probably pass over it
and go on to the next verse.
But you’re not in a rush,
and you notice
a cross reference beside the name.
It refers you to 1 Chronicles 6:33.
So you decide to investigate,
and in doing so,
you learn something
heartwarming about Jehovah.
Let’s do that.
At 1 Chronicles chapter 6
(I’ll give you a moment)
and verse 33,
it says:
“These are the men
who served with their sons:
“Of the Kohathites, Heman the singer,
son of Joel son of Samuel.”
So this Heman was Samuel’s grandson.
Now, what do we know
about his family’s situation?
Well, his father, Joel,
and his uncle, Abijah, were judges.
But they had a terrible reputation.
They’d rule in your favor
if you could pay enough.
But if you were poor, forget it.
And the whole country knew about it.
At one point, the Bible says
that “all the elders
of Israel . . . came to Samuel”
and said they didn’t want
Joel and Abijah as judges anymore.
They wanted a king;
Jehovah was furious.
And He couldn’t have been too happy
with Joel and Abijah either.
Now, can you imagine the effect
that this corruption had
on the reputation
of Heman’s family? the shame?
But like Hezekiah,
Heman didn’t allow
his father’s bad example to paralyze him.
Heman developed
his own personal relationship with Jehovah.
How do we know?
We followed a few clues.
We followed a few cross references,
and we came to 1 Chronicles 25:5.
Let’s do that.
First Chronicles 25:5
and, again, we’re trying to find
something more about Heman.
It says: “All of these were sons of Heman,
“a visionary of the king in matters
pertaining to the true God to his glory;
“thus the true God gave Heman
14 sons and 3 daughters.”
Did you see it?
“A visionary of the king.”
What was a visionary?
It was a kind of prophet.
Now, let’s see.
Samuel was a prophet,
and now Heman was a prophet.
Do you see what’s heartwarming?
Jehovah was dealing with Heman
in much the same way
that he had dealt with his grandfather.
Jehovah does not hold the sins
of the fathers against the sons.
That is something very,
very nice to remember.
And can you see where this example
would help some people you know?
Some even in full-time service
have a hard time with it
because they had a rough family background
and they may feel that they’re worthless.
Mary is a case in point.
I’m going to call her Mary.
Now, Mary’s father was so violent
that at times Mary, her mom, and her siblings
had to get up in the middle of the night
and run for their lives.
And to the neighbors,
they were “that” family.
To make it worse, they were poor.
So all this made Mary feel worthless
—until—
until the day when she started studying
with the Witnesses.
She developed
her own relationship with Jehovah,
and she accepted him as her Father.
And today, Mary is a pioneer.
How does she feel about her life?
Here’s what she wrote:
“Jehovah is constantly looking for those
who want a friendship with him.”
And here’s a touching point:
“He’s even looking
into the hearts of children.”
Isn’t that nice?
Now, there are two lessons here.
As Heman’s example shows,
our family background
doesn’t define who we are.
Jehovah will deal with us as individuals.
And a second example,
one for the elders, is be like Jehovah.
Treat each member
of the family as an individual.
Don’t lump them all in together.
Now to our second point:
We can make our Bible reading more enjoyable
if we try to fill in the blanks.
And that’s something
that our Bible dramas do.
They fill in the blanks for us.
Now let’s illustrate:
Let’s consider the example
of Queen Esther and the king’s son.
Now, you remember the story.
King Ahasuerus,
who is understood to be Xerxes I,
was displeased with Queen Vashti,
and he decided he was going to replace her.
So a call went out
into the whole Persian Empire
for the most beautiful women
to be brought to the palace,
and Esther was among them.
Now, the women were placed
under the care of a man named Hegai,
and his job was
to get them ready to meet the king.
Well, when we read Esther 2:9,
we smell trouble.
Let’s read it,
and you see if you can figure out
what trouble is looming here
—Esther 2:9.
Remember, we’re trying to fill in the blanks.
We’re trying to imagine.
“Now the young woman [Esther]
“was pleasing to him [Hegai]
and won his favor.”
Now, this is a competition.
Keep that in mind.
This is a competition.
“So he promptly arranged
for her beauty treatments
and her [her] diet.”
Wait a minute.
That’s another detail
we’ll have to pursue sometime.
Esther was Jewish.
She was trying to hide the fact
that she was Jewish,
and there were so many things
the Jews couldn’t eat.
How did she handle that?
But that’s for another day.
Let’s carry on.
And talking about Hegai, it says:
“He assigned to her seven selected
young women from the king’s house.
“He also transferred her
and her young attendants
to the best place in the house of the women.”
Do you smell trouble?
Do you see the problem?
Preferential treatment.
This is a competition.
There’s probably a lot of jealousy
going on among the candidates.
And now Hegai
is doing everything in his power
to help Esther to win the king’s heart.
How do you suppose that went down?
It could have led to big trouble.
And here’s another factor.
What about the king’s wives?
Now, there was only one queen,
but Ahasuerus had many wives.
Some say he had 330 wives.
Now, when Vashti was deposed,
who do you suppose
expected to become the queen?
The number two wife.
And yet, instead of going
into the harem and choosing someone,
they went outside the palace
—even to women who didn’t have royal blood.
How do you suppose that went down?
And now think about this:
Some scholars believe that although Vashti
was deposed as queen,
she didn’t leave the palace.
She just couldn’t ever see the king again.
If she was still there,
as some scholars believe,
was she plotting in the background?
This could have been
a very difficult situation.
But Esther 2:15 tells us
something very interesting about Esther.
We’re going to read just the end of verse 15
of Esther chapter 2, at the end of verse 15.
It says: “All the while
“Esther was winning the favor
of everyone who saw her.”
Esther avoided the land mines.
What does that tell us?
She was not only a very beautiful woman,
but she had a beautiful godly personality
—a winning personality.
Well, we said this was
about Esther and the king’s son.
Who is the king’s son—the heir?
Well, we met him
at the convention this past summer.
He was the man
who was so nice to Nehemiah
—Artaxerxes.
And if the historians
have their facts straight,
Artaxerxes would have been
only three years old
when Esther married his father.
Now, history tells us
that as kings of Persia go,
Artaxerxes had a very nice personality.
He was mild, peaceable, kind
—so unlike his father,
who had a terrible temper.
We have to ask,
Did Esther have anything to do
with the pleasant disposition of Artaxerxes?
Maybe she did.
Who knows?
We’re using our imagination.
We’re trying to fill in the blanks.
Well, we haven’t discussed
anything earthshaking here,
and that isn’t the point of this talk.
But if you investigate the details
and fill in the blanks,
it’ll contribute to the pleasure you derive
from reading the Bible.
And if Bible reading
is a pleasant experience for you,
you’ll have no trouble
to arrange a schedule
of daily Bible reading.
Enjoy!
Thank you, Brother Splane.
We enjoyed your presentation,
and we look forward to enjoying
our Bible reading even more.
Next on our program,
we will hear from Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the Service Committee.
He has the catchy theme for us
“What Do You Want Me to Do for You?”
Brother Hyatt, please.
I know you agree.
Your Gilead training has been a gift
—a gift from Jehovah, Jesus Christ,
and “the faithful and discreet slave.”
Have you thought about how
you’re going to share your gift
and allow others
to benefit from your training
when you return to your assignment?
It’s a good question.
When we get back
to the busyness of a routine,
perhaps the stress and anxieties
of increased responsibility,
sharing a gift may be
the last thing on your mind.
So it’s good to think about it now.
What will help you to strengthen,
encourage, motivate,
and instruct those who you oversee
—your workmates, your brothers
and sisters in the congregation?
We can learn much from the way
Jesus dealt with people.
Like you, Jesus was entrusted
with a beautiful gift.
Unlike you and me,
Jesus had some amazing abilities.
For example, he could read hearts.
The Scriptures describe an occasion
when Jesus responded to a man’s thoughts,
rather than to his words.
Do you think Jesus’ ability
to know what his audience was thinking
and feeling enhanced his effectiveness
as he shared his gift?
Of course.
But interestingly, the Scriptures reveal
that Jesus dignified people
in the way he communicated with them.
He often asked meaningful questions
and listened attentively to the answers
before he shared his gift.
For a few minutes this morning,
let’s consider two occasions
when Jesus did just that.
In doing so, we’ll get some pointers
that will assist you
to be effective in sharing
your gift of Gilead training.
The first account is found
in the Bible book of Mark chapter 10.
Let’s turn there together.
Mark chapter 10, beginning in verse 35:
“James and John, the sons of Zebedee,
“approached him and said to him:
“‘Teacher, we want you to do for us
“whatever we ask of you.’
“He said to them:
“‘What do you want me to do for you?’
“They replied: ‘Grant us to sit down,
one at your right hand
and one at your left, in your glory.’”
The parallel account in Matthew
reveals that James and John
did not approach Jesus on their own.
They had their mother do it for them.
Do you think,
as this woman approached Jesus,
he knew what she wanted?
Probably.
How did he deal with her?
Did he interrupt her? reprimand her?
No.
Instead, he asked a question:
“What do you want me to do for you?”
The second account is just a few verses down
—Mark chapter 10, beginning in verse 46.
Here we learn about a blind beggar
named Bartimaeus.
He sat by the road, and when he heard
that Jesus was passing by,
he called out: “Son of David, Jesus,
have mercy on me!”
The crowd tried to quiet him,
but Bartimaeus called out even more loudly.
“Jesus stopped
and said: ‘[Bring] him to me.’”
Now Bartimaeus had an audience
with the Son of God.
How did Jesus address Bartimaeus?
In verse 51: “Jesus said to him:
“‘What do you want me to do for you?’
“The blind man said to him: ‘Rabboni,
“let me recover my sight.’
“And Jesus said to him: ‘Go.
“Your faith has made you well.’
“And immediately he recovered his sight,
and he began to follow Jesus on the road.”
“What do you want me to do for you?”
The same question is in both accounts
but very different situations.
Why do you think Jesus asked this question?
Well, he accomplished
at least four things.
What were they?
Well, first of all,
he dignified his audience
by encouraging communication.
Number two,
he allowed his audience to reveal
what was in his or her heart
to put it on the table, as it were.
In his dealings with James and John,
the question actually protected Jesus
and gave him an opportunity
to give those two apostles
a valuable lesson in modesty:
‘This matter of giving
the right and left places
in the Kingdom is not mine to give.’
Finally, in the case of Bartimaeus,
would you agree that the question
provided an opportunity
to strengthen Bartimaeus’ faith
and to give him effective assistance,
allowing Bartimaeus to articulate his desire?
“What do you want?”
And then to experience
the immediate realization
would have left no doubt in Bartimaeus’ mind
that he had been considered.
And how did it affect him?
Well, the account says:
“He began to follow [Jesus]
on the road.”
It’s a beautiful example
of asking a question
that helps you to share your gift.
When I was
a newly appointed circuit overseer,
the elders in a congregation
that I was serving
expressed concern about a sister
who was missing meetings.
They asked me if I would be willing
to make a shepherding visit.
Of course, I was happy to do that.
The arrangements were made.
Another elder accompanied me,
and I shared all of the appropriate verses
about meeting attendance.
The sister listened,
and as we were leaving,
she looked me in the eye,
and she said, “You don’t have a clue.”
At the time,
I thought she was being disrespectful.
But as I thought about it,
I came to wish
that instead of showing up
with all the appropriate verses,
I had showed up
with all of the appropriate questions.
“What do you want me to do for you?”
“How may I help?”
“What’s been happening in your life?”
Those kinds of questions
allow you to render meaningful assistance.
I learned from that experience.
I hope you can learn from my mistake.
Don’t make the mistake of thinking
you know what a person wants or needs.
Jesus did know, and he still asked.
Questions
—they dignify the audience;
they allow your listener to reveal
what is in his or her heart.
It may protect you,
and it allows you
to render meaningful assistance.
Approach your assignment
the way Jesus approached his.
“What do you want me to do for you?”
If you do,
not only will
you effectively share your gift,
you will be a gift wherever you serve.
Thank you, Brother Hyatt,
for opening our eyes to Jesus’ question:
“What do you want me to do for you?”
You will now enjoy Brother Alex Reinmueller,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
with the “inspiring” subject
“Let Jehovah Inspire You.”
Have you ever had an important decision
suddenly thrust on you?
You thought you knew the right thing to do.
But as soon as you decide,
you start having second thoughts
—maybe even regrets—
and now you can’t stop thinking,
‘Did I do the right thing?’
This tendency to repeat a thought
over and over again is called rumination.
And when those thoughts make us feel anxious,
it can be bad for our health.
Some of you students
made tough decisions
before you came to this class.
Thank you for that.
And everyone right now is faced
with challenging decisions every day.
So, what can we do
to stop anxious rumination once it starts?
Well, open your Bibles with me to Psalm 37:5,
and notice the advice
that is given to us here:
“Commit your way to Jehovah;
“rely on him,
and he will act in your behalf.”
Now, the word for “commit” here
literally means “to roll, or remove,
something from our life.”
So as the footnote says,
we need to “roll [our] way
[our concerns, our anxieties] upon” Jehovah.
When we ruminate anxiously,
we’re holding on to our problem,
but the Bible says that through prayer,
we have to take the problem off our shoulders
and put it on Jehovah’s.
In other words, we no longer act
as if the burden is ours.
We need to leave it in his hands.
It sounds so simple,
but at times, it’s hard to do.
So, what can help us
when we have trouble letting go?
Well, our suggestion today
is to let Jehovah inspire you with awe.
Now, to inspire someone
means to make them feel
that they want to do something and can do it.
And it may be that Jehovah
gave us the emotion of awe
for that very purpose.
You may be wondering now,
How can awe help me?
Well, open your Bibles again,
this time to Genesis chapter 28.
And let’s look at an example together
that illustrates how this can work.
In verse 10,
we catch up with the patriarch Jacob.
He’s on the road.
Notice it says:
“Jacob departed from Beer-sheba
and kept going toward Haran.”
Why was he going there?
Well, the main reason
was to get away from his brother, Esau.
Why?
Because Jacob had just made a tough decision.
And Esau was mad.
You know the story.
For most of his life,
Esau despised the family birthright,
and that upset Jacob very much.
So at some point,
he purchased the birthright from him.
Years go by, and then one day,
their father, Isaac, is getting ready
to bless Esau as the firstborn.
Can you picture the scene?
What was Jacob going to do?
It’s not possible today
to know all the factors
that influenced Isaac,
Rebekah, and Jacob back then.
But the fact is,
Jacob’s decision
put a strain on the whole family.
Esau began plotting to kill his brother,
and that’s why Jacob was on the road.
Do you think he might have been ruminating
a bit that day on what happened?
Did he perhaps have second thoughts?
Was he asking himself:
‘Did I do the right thing?
‘Was it OK to fool my father?
What does Jehovah think of me now?’
Those would have been reasonable questions.
Of course,
we don’t know what Jacob was thinking.
But if he was having second thoughts,
what happened next
must have helped him
to stop ruminating on them.
Notice what we read in verses 11 and 12:
“In time
“he came to a place
“and prepared to spend
the night there because the sun had set.
“So he took one of the stones of that place
“and set it to rest his head on
and lay down there.
“Then he had a dream, and look!
“there was a stairway set on the earth,
“and its top reached up to the heavens;
“and there were God’s angels ascending
and descending on it.”
Now, this heavenly ladder
may have looked
like a rising flight of stones
like the one you see here
in this illustration.
Jacob could see now
that he was not alone.
He was a small part
of an awesome organization.
And there is communication
between the different parts
of that organization.
Angels minister in some important way
between Jehovah and humans
who have his approval.
And there was more.
Let’s continue in verse 13:
“And look!
“there was Jehovah stationed above it,
and he said:
“‘I am Jehovah the God of Abraham
“‘your father and the God of Isaac.
“‘The land on which you are lying,
“‘to you I am going to give it
and to your offspring.’”
How comforting those words
must have been to Jacob!
Jehovah wasn’t displeased with him.
Quite the contrary.
He promised to bless Jacob
in a marvelous way.
Jehovah apparently used
this awesome experience
to help Jacob to let go
of any anxiety he might have had.
As long as he continued to do his best,
Jacob could trust Jehovah to do the rest.
What a relief!
Notice his reaction in verse 17:
“And he grew fearful and added:
“‘How awe-inspiring this place is!
“‘This can only be the house of God,
and this is the gate of the heavens.’”
Jacob’s relief here is almost palpable.
He is no longer conflicted.
The vision inspires him
to make a vow of loyalty to Jehovah forever.
You can read what he did and said
in the latter part of this chapter.
Now, verse 17
uses the same Hebrew word twice.
The first time it’s translated as “fearful,”
the second time as “awe-inspiring,”
and that may be
because awe is a surprising emotion.
It’s a wonderful mix
of inspiration and fear.
You sense you’re in the presence of someone
or something greater than yourself,
but it makes you feel small in a good way.
Awe can humble you,
and that shifts your thinking.
It helps you to see things as they are
and not as you expect them to be.
It’s the kind of fear Proverbs 1:7 says
“is the beginning of knowledge,” or wisdom,
and that may be why at times
Jehovah evokes awe in us.
Like Jacob,
people often say they feel more centered
and spiritual after an awesome experience.
Awe seems to pull us out of ourselves.
It connects us
on a deeper level with Jehovah,
and it reconnects us
with what is most important
—Jehovah’s sovereignty,
his creation, and his people.
Now, getting away from Esau
did not end Jacob’s problems.
There were other times in his life
when he again became very anxious and afraid,
but true to his word,
Jehovah was always there.
As long as Jacob was faithful,
Jehovah made sure he would succeed.
Twenty years later, when Jacob returned
to Canaan with his family,
Jehovah sent out a company
of angels to greet him.
How awesome was that!
Well, what does all of this mean
then for you and me?
Psalm 89:7 says
that Jehovah is “awe-inspiring
to all [those] around him.”
If you’ve ever hiked in Banff National Park
or walked in Muir Woods
or felt goose bumps as you looked up
into the night sky,
you know what awe feels like.
You’ve experienced
Jehovah inspiring you.
So the next time you need
to get out of your head,
remember awe.
Take a walk in the woods;
sing your favorite Kingdom song.
Awe may be
the most underutilized way we know
to help us to stop ruminating
on anxious thoughts
and fully commit our way to Jehovah.
Don’t let your problems stress you out.
Do your research, pray for guidance,
make the best decision you can,
and then let Jehovah
inspire you with awe.
We enjoyed that presentation, Alex.
Now we have one of the Gilead instructors,
Brother Trent Lippold,
with the somewhat cryptic theme
“Mark Your Meribah.”
Brother Lippold, what do you mean by that?
He did not miss the sign the first time,
but the second time, it meant his life.
He was Moses.
Our lives are full of signposts
—figurative markers for lessons,
memories, experiences.
Some good, some bad.
Some signposts we erect;
others are put up for us.
In either case, they should help us
to continue in life successfully.
For instance, consider a lesson
—a signpost—
in the life of Moses.
It happened
shortly after the crossing of the Red Sea,
and it’s recorded in Exodus chapter 17.
At a place called Rephidim,
the Israelites gathered and there was Moses
by a crag with his staff
and with a quarreling nation.
The events there at Rephidim
provided a significant lesson for Moses
—something to remember
for future circumstances.
And so he marked that spot.
How did he do it?
He changed the name from Rephidim,
which means “Refresh,”
to Meribah,
which means “Quarreling.”
Little did Moses know
that that name would ring in his ears.
Thirty-nine years later,
at a place called Kadesh,
Moses was again near a crag with his staff
and with a quarreling nation before him.
And based on the events that happened there,
look at what is recorded
at Numbers 20:12, 13.
At Numbers 20:12, 13, we read:
“Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron:
“‘Because you did not show faith in me
“‘and sanctify me
before the eyes of the people of Israel,
“‘you will not bring this congregation
“into the land that I will give them.’
“These are the waters of Meribah,
“where the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah,
so that he was sanctified among them.”
Moses is taught a lesson here.
It’s unclear who exactly
named the place Meribah,
but Moses did record
that these were “the waters of Meribah”
—an unforgettable signpost in Moses’ life.
What it meant to Moses was very clear.
So, what now?
What would Moses do following this?
Well, from verse 14 (if we were to read it),
we would see that Moses
carried on with his assignment.
He continued to lead the Israelites.
He led them against the Kings Sihon and Og.
He began to see Jehovah’s mighty arm of power
as they drew closer and closer
to the Promised Land.
And in his enthusiasm,
Moses makes one request of Jehovah.
He turns to him, and we can read his words
at Deuteronomy 3:25, 26.
Moses’ words in verse 25, he writes:
“‘Please let me pass over
and see the good land
“that is across the Jordan,
this good mountainous region and Lebanon.’
“But Jehovah was still furious
with me because of you,
“and he would not listen to me.
“Rather, Jehovah said to me,
‘Enough from you!
Never speak to me again about this matter.’”
“Jehovah was still furious with me
because of you.”
Meribah—that’s what Moses was referring to.
The signpost was clear for Moses.
How would Moses respond to this?
What would he do?
Well, Moses carried on.
He got back to work, back to business.
He wasn’t finished.
He continued to lead and shepherd the nation.
He prepared Joshua to be his successor.
And he worked along until Jehovah
came to Moses and said to him,
“Moses, it’s time to go to the mountain.”
In other words, it was time for Moses’ death.
Read, please, Jehovah’s words to Moses
at Deuteronomy 32:51, 52.
Beginning in verse 51
of Deuteronomy chapter 32,
we read Jehovah’s words:
“Because both of you
[that is, Moses and Aaron]
“were unfaithful to me among the Israelites
“at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh
“in the wilderness of Zin,
“because you did not sanctify me
before the people of Israel.
“You will see the land from a distance,
but you will not enter the land
that I am giving to the people of Israel.”
Jehovah draws Moses’ attention
back to Meribah.
What effect did this have on Moses
when Jehovah referred to Meribah again?
Well, think of this:
After Jehovah’s refusal
to reconsider his judgment on Moses,
Moses continued
fully dedicated to his assignment.
In fact, the details make up
the book of Deuteronomy.
If you look at what happened
shortly before Jehovah’s words
here in chapter 32,
we find that Moses recited
a beautiful song of praise to Jehovah
following Jehovah’s words.
In chapter 33, we find Moses here
giving a blessing for the nation of Israel.
Do you see what happened to Moses?
Moses marked the lessons
and experiences in his life,
like Meribah.
He was not paralyzed
or broken by disappointment.
Rather, his resolve
to serve Jehovah faithfully
was strengthened.
What helped Moses?
How did he do it?
Consider at least two things
that may have helped Moses.
Number one:
Moses’ intimate friendship with Jehovah.
For example, why would Moses
even ask Jehovah
to reconsider his judgment on him?
Because Moses knew Jehovah intimately.
He knew him to be
“a God merciful and compassionate”
and “abundant in loving-kindness.”
And when Jehovah refused to reconsider,
Moses did not say a word.
Why?
Because Moses knew that Jehovah
was also a God ‘perfect in his activity
and that all his ways are justice.’
You see, from Moses’ example, we see
that the more intimate
our friendship is with Jehovah,
the more intimately
he can teach us and train us.
And thus, like Moses,
it will be easier to get past disappointment
and continue in our assignment
faithful and joyful.
Consider a second thing
that may have helped Moses,
and that was Job.
Remember, Moses wrote the book of Job
around 1473 B.C.E.,
around the same time as the events
that took place at Meribah of Kadesh.
The words are fresh in his mind.
Moses knew how Jehovah dealt with Job.
For example, at Job 38:3,
Jehovah said to Job:
“Brace yourself, please, like a man;
I will question you.”
Moses knew how Job responded to his problems
and to Jehovah’s correction.
For example, at Job 40:4,
Job said to Jehovah:
“I put my hand over my mouth.”
And Moses also knew
the final outcome
of the matters with Job.
Therefore, Moses was able to see
his own difficulties
and his own disappointments
through the prism of universal sovereignty,
and that gave Moses perspective.
So take advantage
of the inspired words of God
at your disposal.
Meditate deeply on the experiences
of Jehovah’s faithful servants
—like Job and like Moses.
These examples will give you perspective
and allow you to move on joyfully.
Brothers and sisters,
the simple truth is that
in our life of service to God,
we may be treated unfairly
and we will likely be disappointed at times.
Our expectations may not be met,
and we will respond poorly at times.
Mark the moment
as a lesson in life—a Meribah.
And if
—as was the case with Moses—
Jehovah marks it for you, be grateful.
Do not be paralyzed
or broken by disappointment.
Like Moses, fix in mind what you have to do.
Allow the experience or the lesson
to strengthen your resolve
to serve Jehovah faithfully and joyfully.
You can—if you mark your Meribah.
And now we know
what you meant by the theme
“Mark Your Meribah.”
And speaking of “Mark,”
we will now listen to Mark Noumair,
another Gilead instructor,
with the theme “From Strength to Strength.”
It’s all yours, Brother Noumair.
Today, it’s a privilege to address you
—a very precious group of people.
Your journey to this day
has not been an easy one.
In this talk, we want to focus
on a specific journey
—the one that began
when you were invited to Gilead
up to your first day in class.
Because of the lockdown,
that journey brought you unexpected trials
unknown to previous classes of Gilead.
Along the way, you said many prayers
and even shed some tears.
But instead of giving into despair
(we’re so proud of you),
you became stronger.
Your journey can be compared
to the journey of a Levite,
as described in Psalm 84.
Let’s open our Bibles to Psalm 84.
We’re going to review the man’s musings
as he traveled from his home
to Jehovah’s temple
—Psalm 84.
And as we do, we will learn what it means
to find strength in Jehovah
and what will help you to continue to go
“from strength to strength.”
So we can begin at verse 5:
“Happy are the men
who find their strength in you.”
Now, what does this mean?
To find strength means
you have to be looking for it.
So we look to Jehovah for strength.
How do we do that?
We do that by prayer and focus.
When we pray, we pray to Jehovah
for his holy spirit
and focus on him.
He gives us strength.
Now, at first, this strength
may be just enough
to start a difficult journey,
such as you started
when you received your invitation to Gilead.
But as the journey continues,
you’ll become stronger
if you take the right approach.
Well, what is that approach?
Well, let’s read on, and we’ll go to verse 6:
“When they pass through the Baca Valley,
“they make it into a place of springs;
and the early rain
clothes it with blessings.”
There were many routes
to travel to get to Jerusalem,
but this Levite speaks of traveling
through the Baca Valley,
and that’s not the scenic route.
The Baca Valley was a dry,
desolate, parched area.
In fact, the word “baca”
comes from a Hebrew word to “weep.”
It seems that the baca plant
exuded a type of milky sap,
giving the appearance of tears,
which added to the gloominess
of this parched land.
There may also have been literal tears shed
as ones made their long journey to Jerusalem.
But notice, notice what this Levite
was able to do
as he walked through this valley.
There, he says in verse 6:
“They make it into a place of springs;
and the early rain
clothes it with blessings.”
You see, this Levite was so focused
on the joy that he would have
worshipping at the temple
that, as he walked through the dry,
desolate Baca Valley,
this scenery along the way
looked attractive to him.
He was able to look at this dried up valley
with eyes of faith
and make it into a place of water springs.
Now, how was that possible?
Well, it’s like when a brother once described
his trip to the house of a sister
he was courting.
It involved getting on dirty buses,
crowded subways,
and walking past dingy apartments.
But to him, the whole trip
was a beautiful scene
because it was taking him to visit her.
Similarly, the Levite of Psalm 84
could see past the gloominess around him
and see Jehovah’s blessings ahead.
He was energized by thinking
about his privilege of actually serving
at Jehovah’s temple
to the point where even the Baca Valley
was beautiful to him,
because it led to the place
he most wanted to be.
And with that in focus, notice what happens.
Let’s read verse 7:
“They will walk on from strength to strength;
“each one appears before God
in Zion.”
Now, what does that mean
—“strength to strength”?
Though the Levite may have entered
the valley of tears
weak under the weight of his problems,
love for true worship
fueled every step taken.
He knew his service would be noticed
by Jehovah,
who would bless his whole-souled effort
to serve him.
That was the initial strength from Jehovah
that he had.
But when he finally arrived at the temple,
the joy of actually appearing
before Jehovah God
—that joy—
and having his approval and blessing
empowered him and it energized him
to walk from the strength
that Jehovah initially gives
to even greater strength.
In other words, it made him
an even stronger person
than he was before beginning the journey.
Now, for you students,
your journey to Gilead
was different from others.
You did not take the scenic route.
But in Jehovah’s strength,
you were able to look
beyond the four walls of quarantine,
beyond the lockdown,
beyond the start of class being postponed.
You looked beyond the dry,
parched ground of the Baca Valley,
and you saw Jehovah’s blessing on his people.
As the Governing Body gave
faithful and discreet direction
to the worldwide brotherhood,
you were right here.
You watched it personally.
So though you may have arrived here
weakened by your personal trials
after walking
through your figurative Baca Valley,
in Jehovah’s strength you came out stronger
and ready to appear
—to appear before Jehovah God
to be trained by his organization.
And then, it was finally announced
that the school would start in August.
And I remember
—I remember the day
when you walked into the classroom
for the first time,
and you sat in your seats,
and you opened up your student binder.
You put your Bible on the desk,
and as you looked up, your eyes revealed,
‘I made it to my journey.’
And class began, day after day.
It is noteworthy that, in Jehovah’s strength,
not one of you
—not one of you missed a day of class.
That is to your credit.
You wanted to learn every day.
You took advantage of every opportunity.
Thank you for the zeal that you showed.
So, yes, remember the lessons from class.
We know you will.
But, also, remember the lesson
from your journey
as you take on new assignments in the future.
See past the challenges along the way;
see past the disappointments;
see past the tears.
Turn your Baca Valley into a spring,
and you will become stronger for it.
You can do this through prayer.
You can do this by praying to Jehovah
for his spirit and focusing on him.
Remember that the end goal
is not the assignment in itself.
The assignment is just a means
to experience your real goal
of having and maintaining Jehovah’s blessing.
If you prayerfully keep that in focus,
Jehovah will completely change your outlook
regarding the challenges in front of you.
The parched land becomes streams of water.
The tears of pain become tears of joy.
You will see Jehovah make you walk on
“from strength to strength”
—from the initial strength Jehovah gives
to becoming an ever stronger servant of his.
He will empower you not only to walk
through the valley of hardships
but you will be that much more ready
for whatever work lies ahead.
You will be in a much better position
to appear before Jehovah your God
and enjoy his favor.
So in conclusion,
take the Baca Valley route
through all your challenges.
There is a wise saying:
“A calm sea never made a good sailor.”
Likewise, don’t trade hardships for comfort,
because you will feel
a closeness to your heavenly Father
in a way that you
never would have experienced
if you hadn’t walked
from “strength to strength”
through the valley of Baca.
That was so encouraging!
Soon, Parts 2 and 3 of the Gilead graduation
will be available on jw.org.
We know that you’re eager
to see the presentation in its entirety.
To conclude,
let’s visit Ireland.
The land is known as the Emerald Isle
for its variety of lush green landscapes.
It stretches from the Cliffs of Moher
to the gentle valleys of Healy Pass
to the Mourne Mountains in the north.
The white wool of sheep
spot these grassy hills and valleys,
but it was a different kind of sheep
that brought C. T. Russell in 1891.
It was the first stop in his tour of Europe.
He traveled here some seven times
over a period of 20 years
and was often met by large crowds.
Today, people are still seeking
truth in Ireland.
They desire to serve Jehovah
with their whole heart
and find a way to symbolize their dedication
in line with COVID-19 guidelines.
Our brothers and sisters make efforts
to reach everyone with the good news,
including those who speak
the traditional Irish language.
Out of the millions here,
a relatively small percentage
speak Irish as their native tongue.
They’re usually found
in close-knit communities
that value traditional culture.
Despite the challenges,
local publishers find success preaching.
This includes our brothers and sisters
in the Castlebar Irish Pregroup,
who were excited to have a share
in the global campaign
in November 2020.
Adding to the excitement,
the campaign featured
the very first Irish-language Watchtower.
Since young ones are required
to learn Irish in school,
they are eager to apply
their language skills in the ministry.
Their enthusiasm spurs others on.
The brothers and sisters
in the Castlebar Irish Pregroup
send their love and greetings
to the worldwide brotherhood.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting!